Welcome to Advances in
OpenGL ES for iOS 5 session.
My name is Gohkan Avkarogullari and
Eric Sunalp will join me on the stage
to talk about some new cool features.
Every year we release a new version
of iOS and with that new release we
basically make new features available.
Two years ago we made
OpenGL ES available on iOS platform.
Last year we did it with MSAA, Discard,
DevTextures, and such.
But sometimes releasing new
hardware makes things possible
and this year we released iPad 2.
And with iPad 2 you get a
lot more graphics horsepower,
you get a lot of CPU horsepower,
and you get a lot of memory bandwidth.
Which enables you to do new things or
do all things in a new and improved way.
I'm going to talk about an application
on App Store that took advantage
of iPad 2's processing power.
And they basically changed their
pipeline to do something specific on
iPad 2 that makes it look much nicer
relative to iPad 1 and other devices.
That's Real Racing 2 HD from Fireman.
And I'm going to walk over a few
examples of what they did on iPad 2.
The dashboard in this scene,
as you can see,
is almost one-third of the screen space.
And it's very visible to the player.
And what they did on the dashboard,
they basically used normal
maps and per-pixel lighting.
That takes advantage of the compute power
of iPad 2 and memory bandwidth as well.
And on the asphalt,
they basically use multiple textures,
light maps, gloss maps, specular maps.
And basically,
they took advantage of iPad 2's
very large memory bandwidth.
They implemented dynamic shadows
on the dashboard depending on
where the sun is and the car is.
MSAA.
MSAA, if you can't change anything
on iPad 2 but only one thing,
you probably should enable
MSAA and see how it works.
It should probably just work fine and you
get instant image quality enhancement.
But you should do more.
If you can do only one, do MSAA.
And finally,
with iPad 2's processing power,
they were able to push a lot
more polygons into the device.
They have much higher poly models
they're using in the games.
OK,
so that was what the hardware gives you.
But we also added some software features.
I'm going to talk about-- we're
going to talk about GL Kit,
a new framework that we
are introducing with iOS 5,
and the new features that we
enabled through OpenGL extensions,
OpenGL ES extensions.
So let's start with GL Kit.
Before I start with GL Kit,
I want to talk about using
OpenGL ES 2 in your games.
And I want to talk about
an example again here.
Brad Larson has an application called
Molecles App that has been on the
App Store for some time and was using
ES 1.1 as its rendering backend.
And this was the kind of rendering
he was getting using ES 1.1.
And when he actually
set out to improve it,
he decided to use OpenGL ES 2.0 and
the power that the programmability
of OpenGL ES 2.0 gives it.
And the end result,
as you can see on the right side,
is basically a much better looking model,
in this case a molecule visualization.
So visualization is very
important for this application.
And he uses techniques of
multiple passes and true
programmability of ambient occlusion,
per pixel lighting, great specular,
as you can see.
So these are the kind of things
you can do with OpenGL ES 2.0.
And when we set out to do GL Kit,
that was one of our goals,
to make these kind of things possible.
So we had two primary goals.
The first one is basically
making life easier for you,
the developers.
And the best way to do it is
basically find problems that are
common to every one of you and
then provide solutions for those.
The second goal we had was to
basically encourage a unique look
for each graphics application.
The ES 1.1 fixed function pipeline
is basically very powerful,
but it's limited in the ways
of how it can do rendering.
It does BlinFong shading, for example,
and textures and such.
You can differentiate through textures.
But it kind of limits
you what you can do.
So the idea is that to allow
you to basically use shaders,
but we also understand that you
have a lot of investment in ES 1.1.
and we wanted to help you with
porting your ES1 applications
in 2.0 and make it easier.
So these are two goals of the GL Kit.
Basically making life easier through
common solutions and allowing you to
easily port your games from ES1 to 2.0.
And it has four sub-parts.
I'm going to talk first
about the texture loader,
just briefly.
So basically the idea of texture
loader is you give us a reference
whether it's on the network,
on the file system, and you get an
OpenGL ES texture object back.
So you don't need to deal with image IO,
libping, libpng, and such.
The second subpart is the
view and view controller.
So we looked at our template and
there's hundreds of lines of code to
set up FBOs for multisending and not,
and set up the display links and such.
And we thought that we can make it much
simpler by giving you this UIKit style
view and view controller that also works
really well with the UIKit hierarchy.
And the third part is basically
a 3D graphics math library.
OpenGL ES 2.0 lacks the transform API,
the matrix stack API of ES 1.1.
And also we've seen that a lot
of people implementing vector
and math libraries themselves.
And basically the
GLK library gives you that,
all the functionality of
the OpenGL ES 1.1 that you
can reuse on OpenGL ES 2.0,
and also adds vector and
matrix stacks to that.
And finally, the GLK effects.
Basic GLK effects are fixed
function pipeline features
implemented in ES 2.0 context.
I'm going to have Eric come over
here and talk about some of these.
Thank you.
Thanks, Gohkhan.
All right.
Hi, everyone.
So we're going to start
with the GLK Texture Loader.
So like Gohkan said,
we want to make texture
loading as simple as possible.
You know, you give us a file reference,
we decode the image, we load it,
create a GL texture out of it,
and there's pretty much just, you know,
one API call to get this thing loaded,
so you don't have to worry about
setting all your OpenGL states.
We're going to make this
as simple as possible.
And like he said, there's a number of
common formats we support,
PNG, JPEG, TIFF.
Pretty much almost every
format that Image.io supports.
So, yeah,
no longer do you have to load a CG image,
decode that,
blit it into a CG image context,
get that data back.
Pretty much just one
API call now to do that.
One of the biggest problems
developers have had is dealing
with non-premultiplied data.
Now when you, you know,
using our library,
you can guarantee the image
won't be premultiplied,
which is a huge thing.
So we have texture 2D support,
QMap support,
and a number of convenient loading
options when you're loading your images.
If you want to force premultiplication,
that's an option you can set.
We'll Y-flip the image
for you if you want,
put it in a native GL orientation,
and you can turn mid-map
generation on or off.
So basic usage, really simple.
You set your Eagle context current.
You make our single call
to the class loading,
to the class,
one of the variant loading methods.
And you get back this object,
this GLK texture info object,
which has all the pertinent information
you need to do your rendering.
So you get the most important
texture name that you can bind with,
the width and height of the image,
alpha if it was pre-multiplied,
or if there was no alpha
pre-multiplied or not.
The original origin of the image
and if we map it for you or not.
So let's run through
a little code example.
So as you can see,
just a couple lines of code here.
We're going to set the context current,
load a path, you know,
pretty canonical way
of loading your image.
Here I'm just setting one
option entering the dictionary,
which is generate_mid_maps,
probably pretty common.
And we're going to make our single class
method call to load the 2D texture.
And you can see-- so basically,
if that call fails,
you may want to do some error checking.
That will return nil.
Otherwise,
you can check-- so if it returns nil,
basically, you have error there, too,
to check to see if you want
to see what went wrong.
Then we assume you do some work,
and then there you go.
There's a texture name to bind with.
And that's pretty much all
it takes to load a texture.
So in addition to a
synchronous usage case,
we have an asynchronous usage case.
Take advantage of iPad
2 multi-core devices.
Very similar usage pattern,
but in this case, instead of using one
of the class methods,
you're going to actually allocate
a GLK texture letter object and
give us your contact share group.
And in this case,
you're going to call one of the
instance methods and provide us
with a GCDQ and a completion block.
So the GCDQ is basically
where that completion block
is going to be called on.
And through that completion block,
you'll get back a GLK texture,
just like you did with the
synchronous case and an error
if there was one loading.
So the code example for that case,
same thing, load the path.
And here we're going to get the
share group for your context.
Give that to us when you create
the GLK texture loader object.
And there it is.
Just make a single call.
Give us the path and whatever
your completion block handler is.
And here I just kind of, in this example,
kind of doing a simple wrapping on,
you know, just informing my app that,
hey, you know,
this thing is completed and here's the
texture info that I'm going to need.
So really simple.
So the next thing we're really proud of
is the GLK View and GLK View Controller.
Like Gohkan said, this thing was,
you know, you saw it on our template,
probably a pain to deal with.
Hundreds of lines of code.
I don't think MSA was there by default.
You know, something you had to code for,
among other things.
So it's pretty much everything you need
to get OpenGL ES into view and on screen.
Again, like Gohkan said,
it's a part of UIKit,
so it's not part of UIKit,
but it's a UIView subclass.
So it fits into the
UIKit model really well.
Responds to set needs
display if you want it to.
So it behaves, you know,
pretty much like a UIView in
all of its associated methods.
Except ours is a little bit different.
You can set a delegate or you can
subclass the class for drawing.
And here's a number of things
it automatically handles,
which was normally done,
partially done in the template for you,
but now done automatically.
Basically creation and
deletion for color,
depth, stencil, turning on MSA or not.
And that's performance win.
We'll do the discard
for you automatically.
And then pretty much, you know,
every time you draw, before you draw,
you're always going to set your
context and your FBO current and
then present that drawing afterwards.
So we also do that for you.
So this is kind of even more
similar to UIView in that,
you know,
if you're going to subclass this thing,
you implement draw rect,
setting the context,
setting the FBO current,
and then presenting afterwards,
just like, you know,
something you don't have
to think about in UIView.
And here it's all done for you.
And then additionally we have a
snapshot support that returns a UI image
for you if you want to use that.
All right.
So the next thing is
the GLK view controller,
subclass of UI view controller,
so it fits into the view
controller model nicely.
And the main thing here is that it's
coupled very tightly with the GLK view
and it handles the redrawing of the view.
So kind of the main value you'd
probably be setting most often,
unless you want the default,
is the preferred frames per second.
And the preferred frames
per second specifies,
you know, maybe 30 or 60,
a value that we'll try to get as
close to as possible on the device or
the display that your view currently
resides without going over the display's
refresh rate or your preferred value.
And then additionally you pause
and resume any time you like,
and automatically when your
app goes in the background,
we'll pause for you,
and when it comes in the foreground,
we'll resume for you.
And that can be disabled
if you want to do,
you know, your own custom work.
And then also to kind of help
separate your scene logic
or maybe your physics logic,
we provide an update method
that stays in sync with draw,
so you can kind of keep
those two things separated.
And then we provide a number of
statistics that you can query for,
such as number of frames displayed.
All right, so here's a code example.
This is the simplest case of
just using the delegate example.
Here I've got a view controller that
I assume I loaded from XIB file.
And here I'm going to query
for the GLK view out of that.
If one wasn't set up in the XIB file,
this will be automatically
created for you,
just like all other view controllers.
So you get back the GLK view,
and here I have this
third class called game,
which I'm assuming does all my, you know,
my scenes.
My rendering.
And I just need to basically assign
it to GLK view as a delegate and
give the GLK view my context.
And then basically here I have
a number of drawable formats
I'm setting as an example.
RGB 888 is just basically default,
so if you didn't want depth and
you didn't want multi-sample,
you really wouldn't have
to set any of these things.
You would just have to set
your delegate in context.
Next I set the same delegate
for my game because I want to
make use of the update method.
And I set a preferred frames per second,
which is 30,
which again is also the default.
Okay, so here,
this would be like the game class.
Pretty much all I would have
to implement in that game class
would be GLK view controller
update and GLK view draw and rect.
And next we'll look at the subclass
and actually really quickly.
Yeah, so basically when you get,
you know, draw and rect,
and it's actually true
for the subclass case,
the rect will be in points, not pixels,
so you can use your content
scale factor to figure that out.
So the subclassing case,
this common method you're used to,
drawRect,
just subclass that and basically even
if you set this thing as a delegate,
you would get this one called
and then for the view controller
update is what you'd implement.
All right, next is GLK Math.
So this is a 3D graphics math library.
We have over 175 functions that
you don't have to implement.
We have a number of common types, 4x4,
3x3 matrix,
4 and 3 and 2 component vector types,
and even a quaternion type.
And the idea is you don't
have to write this for ES2,
but we also wanted to,
when we were looking at what would you
guys have to do to port from ES1 to 2.0,
you know, you have a lot of this list
code that already deals with
ES1-1 matrix stacks and such.
So we also additionally added a matrix
stack functionality so that your port
would almost be one-to-one with all
the equivalent ES1-1 math functions.
And we try to make it as
high performance as possible,
so, you know,
functions are in line where possible,
and we make use of all the
great hardware in our devices.
So here's kind of to impress upon you
the number of functions that we have.
Should really help out.
It's kind of hard to see.
So here's our one example.
This would be basically maybe
some simple 1-1 code you'd have,
and this is what it would
look like in GL Kit.
These are core foundation types.
I'm creating a projection
stack and a model view stack.
And I'm basically actually
using a GLK matrix 4 type
to create a frustum matrix,
and then I'm loading that onto
my projection matrix stack.
And then I'm going to,
based on my model view stack,
load an identity and do a number
of equivalent ES 1.1 transforms,
translate, rotate, and scale.
And yeah, pretty simple.
And that's it for the math,
and I'll handle it over to Gohkan
now to talk about GLK effects.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Thanks, Eric.
So GLK effects, as I said before,
is basically re-implementation of
fixed function pipeline features
within the ES 2.0 context.
So you get great visual
effects with minimal effort.
You don't have to write
shaders for those.
You don't have to basically create
probably hundreds of different
shaders depending on your state.
It's a great way to go from 1.1 to 2.0.
And the main goal of it is interoperable
with custom OpenGL ES 2.0 shaders.
So you can basically do part of
your rendering with GLK effects.
And if you have something that's
specific to your application that
uses a special kind of shader,
like a particle effect
or GPU skin object,
you can do still ES 2.0 shaders
and basically mix and match them.
So we come up with three effect classes,
named effect classes.
We have base effect,
reflection map effect, and skybox effect.
And I'll talk about each
one of them in a second.
So the general architecture
and usage of it is very simple.
You need to configure your vertex state.
This is basically standard
OpenGL ES 2.0 vertex state setup.
The only thing in here is that you use a
predefined GLK effects vertex attribute
name so that we can basically find
out which vertices you specified and
what they correspond to in our shaders.
And then you all look in at
your GLK effect class instance,
either the base effect,
reflection map effect.
And then configure the effect parameters.
You can basically enable
things or set some parameters.
And then once you're done
with configuring your effect,
you basically call prepare to draw.
In this case,
what we're doing is we're not
generating internal shaders
every time you change a state.
We basically want all
your state to be set up,
all your finalization to be done.
And at that point,
we'll set the GL state.
We'll generate or reuse
the necessary shaders.
And then we're ready to
go for your rendering.
And you would bind your
VAO as the best practice.
You should be using VAOs.
And then you'll make a draw call for
either draw arrays and draw elements.
So this is how it works.
It's very simple.
Let's talk about the base effect.
Base effect basically captures
most of the ES 1.1 functionality.
It does things like lighting,
multiple lights, material properties you
can set for each light,
and light properties you can set,
multi-texturing, and fog, constant color,
the transformations that
you can do on your objects.
The things it doesn't cover
is basically texture combiners
and clip planes from ES 1.1.
And here's an example.
This part is basically how
you set up your vertex state.
It's no different than any
other ES2 vertex state setup.
In this case, you're basically generating
a VAO and then your VBOs and
putting data into your VBOs.
The only point in here is basically when
you pass a vertex attribute pointer,
basically use names that
are specific to GLK.
In this case,
GLK vertex attribute position and
GLK vertex attribute normal when you
set your position and normal raise.
So the second part is basically
allocating and initializing your effect.
So you get a base effect in here,
and then you start
setting your parameters.
In this example, actually,
we went a little further
than what ES 1.1 did.
We support also the per-pixel lighting.
And so you basically set up the lighting
time to per-pixel and enable a light.
So you enable those things
based on -- basically,
we try to keep as close
as possible to ES 1.1.
So all our light parameters,
all our material parameters
are very similar to ES 1.1.
And so are the default
values for those parameters.
So if you don't set anything,
you get basically the default
ES 1.1 state kind of parameters.
But if you're going to change it,
this is the place to change.
You set your material properties.
Here in this case, we enabled the light.
We set a diffuse color.
We set a shininess.
And then we're ready to draw.
So we basically let the effect
note that we're ready to draw,
and we call the prepare to draw API.
At this point, all the state is settled.
All the necessary shaders are generated.
We try to generate basically
the optimum shader.
So if the things are not enabled,
there's no shader code
to run non-enabled stuff.
And you bind your
VAO and make a draw call,
and you get something drawn
like on the right side here,
per-pixel light.
Skybox effect is a little different.
It provides a scene skybox
for your application.
If you can think of it as a
360-degree background image.
And it has very few parameters.
You can center it, change the center of
your skybox or resize it.
Since it's a skybox,
there's no actual vertex
array state initialization.
There's no requirement for that.
Here's a code example for that.
We allocate and initialize our skybox.
Basically, we need to give it a -- our
skybox is going to be a cube map.
Here we're basically
assigning a cube map,
and we're actually using texture
loader to load the cube map.
So that's just one line of code.
And then we set the prepare to draw.
So our skybox is ready to be rendered.
And then we can call the draw API.
The second difference is basically you
can see the skybox has its own draw API,
because we didn't set the vertex state.
So you have to call the
draw API on the skybox.
Reflection map effect
builds on the base effect.
So we added reflections
to the base effect.
So everything that you
had for base effect,
like lighting, materials, and textures,
multi-texturing,
are still available to you.
It's a basic subclass of the base effect.
You can set them as you did before.
And on top of that,
it adds reflection mapping,
a cube map type environmental mapping.
And we basically use the specification
of the desktop specification OpenGL 2.1.
So we try to stay as close
as possible to that one.
And we use a cube map
for reflection samples.
So initialization of vertex array object
is no different than the base effect.
So in this example,
we're not actually covering it.
And we create our effect.
So the difference here, for example,
from the base effect,
when we set the parameters,
you can set the same
parameters over here,
but you need to assign a
kubemap texture for reflections.
Now,
when you have a reflection on an object,
it is independent of the
position of the viewer.
So if you pass only the model view
matrix to the reflection effect,
it won't be able to figure out
how to create the reflections.
If you think about like a
shiny car next to another car,
it doesn't really matter where
you're looking at the shiny car.
The reflections are always
at the same place on the car.
So therefore, and when you construct
your model view matrix,
you need to basically decompose it
into the model part and the view part.
And for the base effect part,
you basically pass the model view
part entirely to the base effect
implementation of the reflection map.
But you also pass the transpose of
the model matrix to the reflection
map effect so that it can actually
calculate the reflections correctly.
As a base effect,
all you need to do is once you set
the parameters and pass the cube map
and give the transfer of the model
view matrix to the reflection map,
you set the prepare to draw.
Everything is ready to go.
And you set bind your VAO and then
call the drawways or draw elements.
And you get basically
your rendering of them.
So we have a technical demo for this.
I say technical because there's not much
artistic stuff in here as you can see.
So we have a background image,
background color really,
and a sphere that doesn't look like a
sphere because it's not lighted here.
So we got this skybox from Emil Persson,
also known as Humus.
So you can see it's 360-degree background
image if you can think of it that way.
And this is basically the skybox is
loaded by the texture loader in here
and it's rendered by the skybox effect.
So on our object in the front,
it's a sphere,
we can basically texture it.
And you can see that it is a
sphere when it has a texture,
it just shows it more.
And you can do per vertex lighting.
This is basically a base effect.
All you do is set the light position and
light parameter and then just say enable
that and then prepare to draw and draw.
Last thing,
or we can use a reflection map
effect and add reflections to it.
So you can see that it is reflecting
the skybox that is around the sphere.
And you can see basically
it's just two lines of code.
It really is setting up the same
skybox cube map as the cube map
for the reflection map effect.
And then setting the transpose of
the model matrix on the reflection
map and then just go from there.
And one final thing.
Both the reflection map and the base
effect support per pixel lighting.
So we can enable per pixel lighting.
And it's very hard to see in this one
because there's not strong speculars,
but you would get per pixel lighting.
Okay, so that's for our demo.
[Transcript missing]
Three categories.
The first one is we basically got a lot
of requests in terms of enhancing the
OpenGL ES and AV foundation interaction.
So we tried to solve that problem,
the issues with that use model.
The second set of extensions are
basically to help you enhance image
quality on your graphics applications.
And the third category is the
extensions and the new features that
help you improve the performance
of your graphics application.
So let's start with enhancing the
OpenGL AV foundation interaction.
So what we set out to do was
basically create a direct path from
video subset of the system to the
graphics and the opposite as well,
from graphics to the video.
And what I mean by direct path is
basically it's better understood
when it's contrasted with iOS 4.
In iOS 4, if you were to get your video
captured data into OpenGL,
and in this example,
I'm assuming that you are trying to
convert them to ARGB and get into OpenGL,
you will have your capture session with
this AV foundation created buffer pools.
You will capture your data into that.
You will be using image buffers
and then you will be transformed
from YUV space to ARGB space.
And then to pass your data,
you will call GL tech image and we would
copy your data at that point from your
storage to our storage in the OpenGL API.
And basically you would have this extra
copy happening on the OpenGL side.
So this is basically -- the
same applies for YUV data.
You could basically use two
different planes and create a
texture from each one of them,
but at the end of the day,
both of those textures
have to be copied over.
[Transcript missing]
So I have a small demo
about this as well.
So this is basically the texture
cache of the GL text image.
So when I move the camera,
it's a little choppy because
it's not running yet.
It's trying to run at 60,
but it's running at 48 because
there's a lot of copies going on.
And when we turn the texture cache on,
it's much smoother and it says 60.
And basically,
this is video data texture put
on a highly tessellated quad.
And so basically,
there's a ripple effect that's
changing the vertex positions
to create the ripple effect.
So I'm sure you guys are going to use
it for something much more interesting,
like things like augmented reality maybe,
or doing barcode scanning,
or getting your OpenGL images out
and encoding on a video encoder.
Okay, that was a Averil
Foundation OpenGL ES interaction.
So the second category we identified
that we wanted to work on was
enhancing the image quality.
And we have basically implemented
the infrastructure for high
dynamic range rendering.
[Transcript missing]
I have a demo for this one.
So here we have basically a
skybox that is high dynamic range,
a 60-bit float skybox.
And so the first effect I talked
about was how you go from indoors
to outdoors and come back,
and then when you go out,
the exposure changes significantly,
and your eyes have to adjust to it.
So here's an example of that one.
As you can see,
this is possible to implement
with high dynamic range targets.
Going back.
I hope it's visible to you as much
as it's visible to me over here.
So the other thing we talked about was
Basically, let me change the exposure.
So you can see you can actually set
your target exposure point to anywhere.
and you would get whatever part of
the exposure you want to capture.
And this image in the back is
actually a very high exposure range.
It's, I think,
nine different exposure levels
that the image was taken with.
Okay.
The other thing I talked
about is basically you can
change the bloom in the scene.
You can see if I turn off the bloom,
the light doesn't really interact
with our semi-transparent bunny,
which reflects and reflects light,
but there's no bloom around it.
In real life,
when you have an object that is in
strong light behind that object,
you have this light
coming around that object,
surrounding that object.
So you can capture those kind of
effects with high dynamic range.
You can go crazy with it if you want.
You can see.
Let's put it into some scene point.
And I talked about tone mapping.
So tone mapping takes a 16-bit
value and maps it into an
8-bit value in a smart way.
And another smart way of doing it is
basically just mapping and clamping it,
just mapping the lower
dynamic range and clamping it.
And if I turn off the
tone mapping in here,
you can see our tone mapping
is just basically clamping
the values to 0 to 1 range.
So the overexposed parts are not
even -- you cannot tell the detail.
But if you go to
underexposed parts -- sorry,
if you go to the darker part,
without tone mapping,
just this part shows up,
but the overexposed parts don't.
Those do not show up.
But with tone mapping, basically,
within the same render target,
you can capture both
kind of exposure levels.
[Transcript missing]
Okay,
another image quality enhancement we
added to iOS 5 is improving the quality
of the shadows that you can have,
dynamic shadows you
can have in your games.
So here's a real life example.
There's a big window
and then the sunlight,
which is a planar light in this case,
is being occluded by the big
columns within the window.
And you can see the
light and the shadows.
And there's a part that doesn't
get any light at all except
for the global ambient light.
And it's called Umbra.
Basically, the column entirely blocks
the sunlight for that part.
So that's easy to capture with the
shadow mapping technique in your games.
But there's this part where
part of the sunlight is blocked,
but since it's not an exact point light,
some other parts of the light
is leaking in and creating
the soft edge on the shadow.
So this new extension that we have
called Apple Shadow Samplers enables
us and you to simulate that kind
of softer edges on the shadows.
It uses a technique called
percentage closer filtering.
So what it does is,
if you think about the shadow mapping,
shadow mapping is capturing the
scene from the perspective of light.
And then when you're rendering it
from the perspective of the viewer,
projecting that to the view and
comparing the depths and finding out if
that pixel on the screen is seeing any
contribution from that light or not.
But it is a binary test when you're
doing it on a per pixel basis.
A percentage closer filtering basically
moves it from a binary test to a four
sample test that will allow you to
generate any range between zero to one.
And basically you do four depth
texture tests and compare and
return a weighted average.
And that tells you how much light
contribution you get from that light,
which also tells you how
much shadow that pixel gets.
And again, it's a feature that's
only available on iPad 2.
So here's an example of the shadow map.
The depth texture from shadow map is
mapped onto the depth values of the
viewer and from the viewer's perspective.
And you can see on the right side,
basically there's no confusion.
There's no light leaking in from
that light for that particular pixel.
And the blue one over here is a
pixel that is getting actually
when on a projected shadow map
is basically corresponding to
four values from that shadow map.
And you can see that it is
partially getting light and
partially not getting light.
So the light will be
attenuated in this case.
Okay.
So we added new GLSL define
called GLApple shadow samplers.
New sampler type, sampler 2D shadow.
And two new GLSL functions,
shadow 2D apple and shadow
2D apple projection.
Projection apple.
And here's a fragment shader example.
So what we're doing here is basically
our sample 2D shadow is getting the depth
texture from the perspective of light.
And we're also passing an attenuation
factor from our vertex shader.
And in the first line,
we're basically comparing
using the coordinates of light,
light texture, how much of it is passing
these comparisons.
And these four samples are taken.
And then using that value,
we're finding out how much light
contribution we're getting.
And the final fragment color is based
on the original color and the light
contribution multiplied with that color.
Now, this gives you software shadows.
And if you have significant
compute bandwidth available to you,
if you're not doing anything else,
you can actually run -- you can jitter
the texture coordinates of the light map,
and you can do multiple tests
and get a larger coverage area.
Amen.
Okay,
we have a demo for this one as well.
So let's start with no shadows.
So this is an interesting demo.
It basically uses a technique
known as light prepass,
a deferred lighting technique.
It's doing four passes, one shadow pass,
and three rendering passes to
end up with 64 point lights and
one sunlight and this huge model,
normal maps,
per-pixel lighting everywhere.
So it's very interesting,
and I think we're going to
talk about this as well at
the session when we have it,
I think, at 4:30 on best practices.
So I want to show you first the
shadow map that I talked about,
the depth values from
the perspective of light.
And you can compare it to the
depth values on the right here
from the perspective of viewer.
So these are mapped onto the one on the
right to basically do the comparisons.
And without shadows,
our scene looks really nice.
But it doesn't look realistic.
When you add hard shadows,
it becomes more realistic.
But you can see on the edges of the
columns that the shadows are per-pixel,
and they show up being as per-pixel.
And when it actually moves,
it's more visible because the per-pixel,
the operation moves up
and down Chris Jitters.
And with percentage closer filtering,
it is much softer.
And we're doing just
four samples in here.
So you can turn it on and off a little
a few times so you can see the details.
Let me animate it.
So this is all real-time lighting
of both point lights and sunlight
and with real-time shadows.
and Sun is gone now,
so we don't have any shadows.
When they come up?
Just in a few seconds, I think.
Then we can basically go
to hard and soft shadows.
Okay.
So these are the things that you can do
by taking advantage of our new extension.
Okay.
So the third category we had is basically
enhancing the performance of your games.
And we'll start with the separate
shader objects extension.
Separate shader objects extension
is trying to solve the problem
of the multiple stdof shaders.
In many games,
you would have this case like
you would have multiple vertex
shaders that are run with multiple
fragment shaders and paired.
If you have n vertex shaders that can
be paired with n fragment shaders,
you would have the cross
pairing of all of them.
Like an example would be if you have a
vertex shader that just does transforms
and another vertex shader that does
transforms plus skeletal animation.
And you have a fragment shader,
one of them doing just texturing,
another one doing texturing plus light,
and third one doing texturing
plus light plus fog.
You might, depending on the object type,
you might use either the first vertex
shader with the second fragment shader.
All six combinations of them are perfect.
And you can do the same thing
with the second vertex shader.
So you would have a set of five
vertex shaders that are being
paired with ten fragment shaders.
So in that case,
you would basically end up compiling
your vertex shader 50 times,
your fragment shader 50 times,
and linking them together 50 times.
So Apple Separate Shader Objects
tries to fix this problem,
or help with this problem.
So it creates a new object type
called Program Pipeline Object,
and it gives you a mix
and match strategy,
possibility of a mix and match strategy.
So what it does is instead
of having a vertex shader,
you basically have a vertex program.
So every stage of the pipeline,
and we have two stages,
vertex stage and the fragment stage,
every stage of the pipeline,
you create a program for that stage,
and then you pair them later.
So if you have five vertex
shaders and ten fragment shaders,
it means that you need to
create five vertex programs
and ten fragment programs,
and then you can pair
them as much as you want.
So instead of 50
compilations on vertex side.
50 compilations on fragment side,
and 50 times linking,
you basically do a lot
less work on the CPU side.
Which means that you end up with
shorter compilation and linking times.
So you can basically take advantage
of it in two different ways.
You can have, basically,
if you were keeping the number of
shaders fewer than you would normally
because you were thinking that your
boot time or level load time was long,
you can add those shaders back and
keep the same amount of time on your
level loading and have more variety
of shaders and better effects.
Or alternatively,
you can just take advantage of
it and have faster boot up times
or faster level load times.
One disadvantage of this extension
is when the compiler can see both
the vertex stage and fragment stage,
it can do some set of optimizations.
It can do some set of
dead code elimination.
It can do, basically,
elimination of unused variances.
It doesn't go and interplay the
variances that are not used.
So if your shader performance
strictly depends on the kind of
optimizations that the compiler
does and it can see both of them,
you probably either change your
shaders or think how much gain
you're getting from this one.
But that is very rare that you
would end up with this kind of
benefits from the compiler normally.
So that's something to know about.
So here's an example.
In our vertex program, basically,
we have a vertex shader
just like you had on IS4.
And you would basically compile
and link that vertex shader
and create a vertex program.
You would do the same for
your fragment shaders.
You would create fragment
programs out of those as well.
And when it's time to use them,
you can basically say, "Hey,
I want to use for this stage this
program and the second stage this other
program." And there's no relinking
or recompiling happening in here,
so it's really fast.
And you can basically pair your first
vertex program with the second fragment
program in here without causing
any new compilations and linkings.
Same here.
You can pair them up in any way you want.
So it has actually two usage models.
It can create program pipeline
objects for each combination.
So you basically can create your vertex
programs and fragment programs and pair
them together at the very beginning
instead of attaching and detaching them,
which would be faster at runtime
but slower at boot time a little.
And then -- or you can use the
same program pipeline object,
just like in my example,
and attach and detach
program stages on the fly,
which would be a little slower on
runtime because you have to basically
attach and detach them when there's some
work going on on the OpenGL ES side,
but you will have faster boot time.
So you can use either model
depending on what your needs are.
It is -- if you're familiar with
the ARP Separate Shader Objects
extension and ARP Explicit Attribute
Location extension from the desktop,
you already know how this thing
works because we basically took
those two and then removed some
of the things that are -- the
ES constraints are not allowed us to do,
like remove geometry stage, for example,
or tessellation stage from that,
and came up with this
Apple Separate Shader Objects,
and we just used the same extension.
Okay, that's Separate Shader Objects.
The final performance optimization
extension is Occlusion Query extension.
So in your games,
you probably have some visibility
determination system to find
out what needs to be drawn and
what not needs to be drawn.
Frostrum calling is an example,
and you might have
something more complicated.
But there are times you would have
an object that's within your Frostrum
but might be occluded entirely
by another object in front of it.
And so this extension,
Apple Occlusion Query Boolean,
Basically,
it allows you to do a binary test to
find out if any of the samples from
this object that might be occluded
is reaching to your render target.
So, the advantage is basically if your
object has 10,000s of vertices,
you use a bonding box inside and you
basically draw it without affecting
the color and depth buffers.
And then the next frame,
you go and check if it were actually
drawn with any of the samples that
are made to the render target.
If it did,
it means that your object is now
visible and you can render it.
If it didn't,
it means that it were actually
entirely occluded by another object,
so you actually didn't have to push that
many data into the rendering system.
And you basically repeat the same
query over and over every frame.
The only minor disadvantage is
that your object might end up
on the screen one frame later.
Again, it's an iPad 2-only feature due
to the hardware requirements.
So the benefit of it is it enhances the
performance by avoiding large draw calls.
So our GPUs are tile-based
deferred renderers,
so they basically don't
have much overdraw.
But if you're pushing 10,000
vertices and none of them are
ending up on your render target,
we are still running the vertex
program on all of those vertices,
and we're pushing data in and
out for all of those vertices.
So you don't have to
do vertex processing.
You gain not doing that.
A code example here.
The frame end is our current frame.
We set a query by calling GL begin query.
And basically,
we put here the bonding box.
Like if you have a car,
you probably have two rectangles that
will cover the car as your bonding box.
And you're passing eight vertices
instead of all the details of your
car into the scene to find out if
any of the samples from the car
is making to the render target.
And in the next frame,
you basically check the
results of your test.
If the result is positive,
it means that some of
the pixels from your car,
some of the samples from your
car is showing up on the screen,
so it's time to draw it.
[Transcript missing]